Hello friends
In this video let us learn how to avoid collision
by using linear probing which is also called us
closed hashing in the previous video we have learned about
hashing and we also learn that in hashing a situation
called collision may occur
So in this video let us learn how to avoid
collision by using linear probing which is also called
as closed hashing let us understand it using an example
So let us take this hash table of size five
and it already has some elements in it then minus
one minus 1 13 and nine
so let us add one mod element to this hash table
So the key will be 15 mod five which is
equal to zero
That means we need to place the data 15 into
index zero but we have data 10 already present the table
at the same position
That is this index zero which was meant to be
the place for data 15 is already occupied by
data 10 this situation is called collision two or
mod elements are pointing to the same hash index under
the modulo size operation
So how can we handled the situation if the supposed
index is not free
Then we can go and check for the very next
index
And if it is free we can place the latter
there
So say here we have two place 15 at index
zero
But it is not free
So we can go and check the next index which
is one
And it has the value minus one which means it
is available to insert the data so we can place
the data 15 at index one
Now let us try to insert another element 20
So the key here will be 20 mod five which
is equal to zero
That is we need to place the data 20 into
index zero
But we have Element 10 already present here
So again the recirculation
So what do we do now We go on and
check the next index which is one and it has
the value 15 which means it is already occupied by
element 15 and it is not free for another insertion
So again collision occurred
So what can we do now We just follow the
same process again
That is we will check the very next index and
this will continue until we find and available index
And here the next indexes two
And here we have value minus one which means index
two is available to insert the data so we can
place 20 in index two So this is how
we handle collision here
If any collision occurs we are linearly checking for
the available index one by one
So this method is called linear probing
So in linear probing if any collision occurs the
formula to calculate the new key value is F of X
equal to x+i mod size where I equal to
123 for etcetera
so let us insert some data and understand the working principle of
linear probing
First let us created initialised a hash table of size
five
So now all the Indices are filled with value minus
one which means currently all the indices are available for
insertion and we have Key equal to data mod size
First let us insert data 30 So applied here in this
equation and we will get 13 mod five equal to
three
That is we have to insert 13 at index three
and here index threes holding value minus one which means
it is free so inserted
That now let us insert data one
So again apply data one in this equation and we
will get one mod five which is equal to one
that is we have to insert one at index one
And here Index one is holding value minus one which
means it is available for insertion
So inserted there now let us insert another data six
So apply it in this equation and we will get
six mod five equal to one
That is we have to insert six at index one
And here Index one is holding the value one and
not minus one which means it is already occupied
So a collision occurred
So what do we do We have to check the
next index
That is we will now use a different equation which
is key equal to data
Plus I mod size and applying data six
Here we will get six plus one mod five
That is seven mod five which is equal to two
So we have to check index two and it is
holding the value minus one
That means it is free for insertion
So insert six at index two now let us insert
another data eleven so apply it in this equation
and we will get 11 mod five equal to one
That is we have to insert data 11 at index
one of this hash table
But when we check Index one is holding the value
one and not minus one which means it is not
available for insertion
So a collision occur here So we have to
apply data plus I in this new equation and we
will get 11 plus one mod
Five that is 12 mod five which is equal two
that is we can try to insert 11 at index
two of this hash table so check index two and
it is holding value
Six
That is it is also not free for insertion So
increment I and apply data again in this equation
Now we will get 11 plus two mod
Five that is 13 mod five which is equal to
three So check index three and it is also not
free
So again increment I and apply data in this
equation
Now we will get 11 plus three mod five that
is 14 mod five which is equal to four So
check index four and it is free
So insert 11 at index four and that is done
Now let us insert
the data so applied in this equation and we will
get 10 mod five which is equal to zero
That is we have to insert 10 at index zero
and here index zero is holding the value minus
one which means it is available
That is we have to insert 10 at index zero
and here index zero is holding the value minus
one which means it is available for insertion
So insert ten at index zero now let us insert
another data 15
So apply data 15 in this equation and we
will get 15 mod five which is equal to zero
That is we have to insert data 15 at index
zero but it is already holding the value 10 and
not minus one which means it is already occupied
it is not free for insertion
So we can say that a collision occurred here
So applied data plus I in this new equation and
we will get 15 plus one mod five that is
16 mod five which is equal to one again
When we check index one
It is not free
So again increments I and apply data in the situation
and we will get 15 plus two mod
Five that is 17 mod five which is equal to
two and we can see index two is also not
free
So again increment I and apply data in this
equation
And we got 15 plus three mod five that is
18 mod five which is equal to three again Index
three is not free
So again increment I can apply data in this
equation and we got 15 plus four mod
Five that is 19 mod five which is equal to
four
So check index four and it is also occupied
And we have applied this data in the equation with
I taking all the values less than size
And we did not find a free space so we
can understand that the hash table is fully occupied
Now
So this is how linear probing solves the problem
of collision
So today we learned about linear probing which is one
method to handle and avoid collision
And here whenever collision occurs We Nearly
check for and Available index and also like insertion searching
and deletion are also performed
Linearly like this
So in the next video we will understand how to
implement hash table using linear probing in detail.